Objectives. A 1993 large waterborne outbreak of Salmonella typhimurium infections in Gideon, Mo, a city of 1100 with an unchlorinated community water supply, was investigated to determine the source of contamination and the effectiveness of an order to boil water.

Methods
A survey of household members in Gideon and the surrounding township produced information on diarrheal illness, water consumption, and compliance with the boil water order.

Results
More than 650 persons were ill; 15 were hospitalized, and 7 died. Persons consuming city water were more likely to be ill (relative risk [RR] = 9.1, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.9, 28.4), and the attack rate increased with increased water consumption. S. typhimurium was recovered from samples taken from a city fire hydrant and a water storage tower. Persons in 318 (30/98) of city households had drunk unboiled water after being informed about the boil water order, including 14 individuals who subsequently became ill. Reasons for noncompliance included ''not remembering'' (44%) and ''disbelieving'' (25%) the order.

Conclusions
Communities with deteriorating water systems risk widespread illness unless water supplies are properly operated and maintained. Effective education to improve compliance during boil water orders is needed.

Introduction
Community waterborne disease outbreaks are uncommon in the United States" 2; when they occur, however, many people may be affected.3'4 Community water supplies are drawn from either surface (lakes, rivers, or streams) or deep (groundwater) sources. Since surface waters are easily contaminated, water systems with surface sources are required to be disinfected, usually by chlorination.5 In contrast, deep water sources are considered pure and are not required to be disinfected.5 However, even water drawn from pristine sources may become contaminated during storage or distribution, especially if the water system is not adequately maintained.

There are 60 000 community water systems in the United States, serving 91% of the population.2 Two thirds of these systems are not chlorinated, and many have decaying water storage or distribution systems.6 Since several pathogens, including Salmonella,7 Campylobacter, and Cryptosporidium spp,9 can be isolated from the environment or from birds and other animal species, water systems that are inadequately maintained, especially those open to the environment, can become contaminated and cause human illness. Community water systems are routinely monitored for coliform bacteria, and, if contamination is detected, local officials may issue orders for residents to boil water.10'11 However, studies to determine whether boil orders are effective are lacking. 12

In late November 1993, seven culture-confirmed cases of Salmonella typhimurium gastroenteritis among Anderson Township residents were reported to the Missouri Department of Health. Food histories revealed no common food exposures, but all patients had drunk water in Gideon, the only municipality in the township. Gideon municipal water was tested and found to contain fecal coliforms; Gideon residents were warned, via a local radio station, to boil their drinking water, and an investigation was launched to determine the source of the contamination, the magnitude of the outbreak, and the effectiveness of the boil water order.

Methods
Household Survey
Anderson Township, located in southeastern Missouri, is 5 x 10 miles (8 X 16 km) in size and had a 1990 US census population of 1599, of whom 1104 resided in Gideon. A systematic random sample of 150 households was drawn from the 548 households on the Anderson Township personal tax roster. Trained interviewers conducted interviews by telephone or, if no telephone number was available, in person between December 31, 1993, and January 6, 1994. Families not residing in Anderson Township were excluded. All family members 18 years of age or older were asked about the occurrence of diarrheal illness between November 1 and December 31, 1993. Residents of Gideon were also asked about compliance with the order to boil water.

A case of acute gastroenteritis was defined as three or more loose stools in a 24-hour period between November 1 and December 31, 1993. Persons with acute gastroenteritis were asked about daily water consumption and visits to Gideon from November 15 until the day of onset of diarrhea. Persons without acute gastroenteritis were asked about daily water consumption and visits to Gideon from November 15 to November 30, 1993. All families were asked about restaurant or grocery store patronage during November 15 through 30.

The t test for clustered samples was used to analyze data from the household survey.13 Relative risks (RRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were determined. The Mantel-Haenszel test for trend and the Pearson correlation coefficient were used for dose responses. All P values are two-sided.

Environmental Studies
As required for routine monitoring, Gideon municipal employees collected and submitted one 100-mL water sample twice a month to the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory, which tested the samples for total and fecal coliforms using the membrane filtration method.'4 After the outbreak had been recognized, the Missouri Department of Natural Resources collected additional 100-mL water samples. The Department of Health and the Department of Natural Resources also collected 1-gal (3.8-L) samples from the water distribution system; these samples were filtered and tested for the presence of Salmonella by the Public Health Laboratory via an enrichment technique with tetrathionate and selenite cystine broth.14

On January 5 and 6, the US Environmental Protection Agency collected 1-L samples from throughout the municipal system, including samples from the wells and the city water towers and sediment from the privately owned water tower in Gideon. These samples were tested for Salmonella at the Environmental Protection Agency's Drinking Water Research Division Laboratory in Cincinnati, Ohio.'4

The Environmental Protection Agency also used a computer model to develop dynamic scenarios describing transport of contaminated water through the distribution system.'5

Laboratory Studies
Stool or rectal swab specimens were collected from hospitalized patients and from residents of the Gideon nursing home who had diarrhea. Standard methods were used in processing samples, at the clinical laboratories of local hospitals and at the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory, for Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter Serotyping and biochemical testing were performed by the Public Health Laboratory and the Foodbome and Diarrheal Diseases Laboratory of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Selected environmental and clinical Salmonella isolates were also subtyped via pulsed-field gel electrophoresis at CDC.16

Results
In early December 1993, absenteeism at the Gideon schools increased by 250%, "and the sales of antidiarrheal medicines increased by 600%. By the end of December, 15 Anderson Township residents had been hospitalized with S. typhimurium infections, and diarrhea had been reported for 28 of the 68 nursing home residents, 7 of whom died.

Household Survey
Of the 150 households selected for the survey, 22 were excluded because they were not in Anderson Township. Of the remaining 128 households, 122 were contacted, and 120 households with 329 members participated. Ninety-two (77%) of the participating households were within the city limits of Gideon. Therefore, information was collected on 246 (22%) of 1104 persons living in the city (according to US census figures) and 83 (17%) of 495 outside the city. The age and sex distributions of the participants were similar to 1990 US census figures.

One hundred thirty-two participants had diarrhea that met the case definition. The date of onset of the initial cases was November 12, and the peak of onset was November 20 (Figure 1). The median duration of diarrhea was 4 days. Diarrheal illness was accompanied by abdominal cramps (in 68% of cases), self-reported fever (50%), vomiting (42%), and blood in the stool (8%). Of the 132 case patients in the survey, 38 (29%) sought medical attention and 5 (4%) were hospitalized.

Persons living inside the city of Gideon (on the municipal water system) were more likely to report having diarrhea than those living outside the city (on private well water) (RR = 1.6, 95% CI = 1.1, 2.3) (Table 1). Among persons living outside the city, those who visited Gideon were more likely to have diarrhea than those who did not visit Gideon during this time (RR = 5.6,95% CI = 1.4, 22.4). Visitors to Gideon who drank Gideon municipal water between November 15 and 30 were also substantially more likely to become ill than those who visited but did not drink Gideon municipal water (RR = 9.1, 95% CI = 2.9, 28.4).

No other exposures explained the differences in attack rates seen between those living inside the city and those living outside the city. Gideon residents were not significantly more likely than those living outside the city to shop at any of the four grocery stores in Gideon or neighboring towns or to eat at any of the seven local restaurants between November 15 and 30. In addition, strong dose-response effects were noted among people living in Gideon, with increased consumption of municipal water associated with increased attack rates of diarrhea (P < .01) (Figure 2).

We used the results of the household survey to estimate the number of Anderson Township residents who became ill with gastroenteritis during this outbreak. Extrapolating the 44% attack rate for city residents and the 28% attack rate for township residents living outside the city to the 1990 census, we estimate that 650 cases of acute gastroenteritis occurred among Anderson Township residents between November 1 and December 31, 1993.

Boil Water Order
All but 1 of the 92 Gideon households in the survey were aware of the order to boil water, but 9 (10%) had not heard about the order until an information sheet was delivered on December 28, 10 days after the boil order had been issued. Thirty households (31%) reported that someone in the house had drunk unboiled water after being informed about the order; 12 of 14 (86%) persons who developed diarrhea after the issuance of the boil order reported drinking unboiled water after being informed about the order. The most common reasons for noncompliance were "forgetting" (44%), not believing the initial notification (25%), and not understanding that ice should be made with boiled water (17%). After the delivery of the information sheet, all households surveyed reported believing there was a problem and understanding that ice should be made from boiled water.

Environmental Studies
The Gideon municipal water system was designed and constructed in the mid-1930s. An average of 130 000 gal of water per day is provided by two adjacent wells 1300 ft (390 m) deep; water was not chlorinated prior to this outbreak. Two city-owned water storage towers (50 000 and 100 000 gal) maintain system pressure; a third privately owned water tower (100 000 gal) was also connected to the system. On November 10, 1993, the municipal water system was flushed by sequentially opening each of the city's 50 fire hydrants for 15 minutes, beginning near the water towers, at an approximate rate of 750 gal per minute (>500 000 gal total). This was the most extensive flushing of the system in at least 3 years.

Bimonthly water samples submitted by the city from 1992 and 1993, including samples collected on November 8 and December 6, 1993, showed no evidence of bacterial contamination. However, coliforms were detected in 1 of 3 water samples collected on December 16 (7 coliforms/100 mL), 1 of 7 collected on December 17 (2 coliforms/100 mL), 4 of 6 collected on December 20 (3 to 6 coliforms/100 mL), and 9 of 13 collected on December 21 (6 to 18 coliforms/100 mL). Fecal coliforms were identified in the water samples containing coliforms that were collected on December 16, 20 (all 4 samples), and 21 (3 of 9 samples). One of the six 1-gal samples from the distribution system, collected from a fire hydrant on December 23, grew dulcitolnegative S. typhimurium. In-line automatic chlorination was begun on December 28, 1993; adequate chlorine residuals were obtained by early January 1994.

A search was conducted for the possible source of the contamination in the municipal water supply. Contamination of the aquifer was thought to be unlikely because there was no evidence of illness in neighboring towns sharing the same aquifer. In addition, no coliforms were detected from two 1-L water samples collected at the pumps (unchlorinated water obtained directly from the aquifer) on January 5. Given the apparent integrity of the aquifer, attention was focused on the water distribution system and water storage towers. No problems were detected with the distribution system, but several problems were noted with the water towers. Birds were observed frequently roosting on the roofs of the towers, and inspectors found an unscreened overflow pipe and holes 5 in (12.5 cm) in diameter (large enough to allow birds to enter) at the top of the private water storage tank. This tower was subsequently disconnected from the municipal system and drained. Sediment collected from the tower on January 5, 1994, grew dulcitol-negative S. typhimurium. However, the back-flow prevention valve between the private tower and the municipal system was operating properly, indicating that water from the municipal system could enter the privately owned water storage tower but probably not the reverse. The two other water storage towers were inspected on January 12. The 100 000-gal city water storage tower had an improper roof vent and an uncovered hatch, and bird feathers were observed in the tank. Water from the 100 000-gal tower was not obtained for culture because, by that time, the municipal water had been chlorinated. City officials were not aware of any previous inspections of the towers.

Results from the Environmental Protection Agency computer model indicated that, during routine operation, most of the water in the distribution system was supplied directly by the wells, while most of the water in the storage towers remained stagnant. The computer model also indicated that the November 10 flushing of the distribution system would have emptied the water towers and that the 100 000-gal tower was the most likely source of the contamination because the first reported illness occurred among patients who lived in the areas that received the greatest amount of water from the 100 000-gal tower. During the first weeks of the outbreak, the attack rates for diarrhea were also higher among people who lived in the areas supplied by the 100 000-gal tower.

Laboratory Studies
Stool cultures from 15 Anderson Township residents yielded Salmonella; 10 of these strains were serotyped, and each was S. typhimurium that did not ferment dulcitol. Salmonella was also isolated from 13 of 19 stool samples collected from nursing home residents with diarrhea; 12 of these isolates were serotyped, including strains from 4 of the 7 residents who died, and each was dulcitol-negative S. typhimurium. Between September 1, 1993, and January 31, 1994, the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory identified 37 S. typhimurium isolates from persons who resided outside of Anderson Township; 12 (32%) of these sporadic isolates were dulcitol negative. The isolates from the 7 outbreakassociated patients and from the fire hydrant were indistinguishable by pulsedfield gel electrophoresis, and different by one band from the water tower isolate. Isolates from 7 persons with randomly selected sporadic cases identified at the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory were also subtyped by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis; one was different from all others, five had an identical pattem distinct from the outbreak-associated patients, and one was indistinguishable from the outbreak-associated patient isolates.

Discussion. We have described a waterbome outbreak of S. typhimurium that apparently caused at least 650 cases of diarrhea, 15 hospitalizations, and 7 deaths in rural Missouri between November 1993 and January 1994. The epidemiologic association between illness and city water consumption is strong, consistent, and dose related. The outbreak was confined to individuals who were exposed to Gideon municipal water. People who drank Gideon municipal water were more likely to become ill, an association that persisted throughout the analysis and became stronger with increased municipal water consumption. Identification of S. typhimurium with an uncommon dulcitol-negative biochemical marker in specimens collected from patients, the water distribution system, and the water storage tower confirmed that the municipal water system was the vehicle of the outbreak.

Contamination apparently entered the water system through the 100 000-gal water storage tower, which had an improper roof vent and an uncovered hatch that could allow free access by wild birds. Feathers were discovered in this tank. Birds frequently carry Salmonella spp.6 and have been associated with other waterbome outbreaks of diarrheal disease17-19 and with the suspected contamination of an open-top water treatment tower.17 If the 100 000-gal water storage tower had become contaminated, contaminated water may have been present in the tower for a considerable period since there was minimal mixing between the tower and the distribution system during routine operations. The flushing of more than 500 000 gal of water from the municipal system on November 10 emptied each of the city water storage towers and apparently disseminated the contaminated water into the distribution system.

S. typhimurium isolates collected from outbreak-associated patients and from the fire hydrant were indistinguishable by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and differed slightly from the isolate collected from the water storage tower. Nevertheless, these isolates may have originated from the same source; the tower isolate differed from the patient and hydrant isolates by only a single band on pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Chlorine may have altered the tower strain, since chlorine was added to the water towers on December 23 and the isolate from the tower was collected 13 days later.

Seven persons died in this outbreak, the most deaths, at that time, associated with a waterbome outbreak in the United States in more than 50 years. The seven patients who died were nursing home residents. Foodbome outbreaks of Salmonella infections in nursing homes are not uncommon,20 and nursing home residents are known to be at a higher risk for serious outcomes of Salmonella infections, including death.21 Although there are no requirements for nursing homes to use chlorinated water, most of the illness associated with this outbreak in the nursing home would have been avoided if the water had been disinfected.

Many residents continued to drink unboiled water after the order to boil water had been issued. Many of the people who heard the initial boil order did not appreciate the severity of the situation; the initial boil order gave no reason for its issuance and did not mention associated illness. Only when the information sheets, which clearly explained the rationale and boiling procedure, were delivered to all residences did compliance with the order improve. When boil orders are issued, water supply operators, local govemments, and public health officials should ensure that all residents are adequately informed about the health risks and consequences of noncompliance. Boil orders should be issued with easy-to understand instructions; current recommendations are to bring water to a rolling boil for 1 minute.22 In small towns with limited media outlets, door-to-door delivery of information sheets should begin as early as possible.

This outbreak demonstrates the need for proper maintenance of water storage and distribution systems, adequate training in water sanitation for water system operators, and disinfection of all community water systems, including systems that obtain their water from groundwater sources. This outbreak could have been avoided with proper water system maintenance and with adequate ongoing disinfection. The Environmental Protection Agency anticipates the enactment of regulations requiring disinfection of all water supplies; until then, the 40 000 communities with unchlorinated water systems, especially those with poorly operated or deteriorating distribution systems, risk widespread illness from contaminated drinking water.23 