Abstract--A recent disease outbreak resulting in 4 deaths, 32 hospitalizations and a total of 243 documented cases of diarrhea was linked epidemiologically and by on-site data gathering supported by the use of a distribution system model to the public water supply. The pathogenic agent, Escherichia coil serotype 0157:H7, was isolated from patients' fecesin tests conducted by the Centers for Disease Control. Illness was restricted to people using public water supply. Untreated groundwater quality was not a factor but some disturbances in the distribution system, possibly 43 water meter replacements and 2 line breaks, may have allowed contaminants to enter the water supply. This is the first time a distribution system model has been used ~o show that the pattern of illness occurrences in a waterborne outbreak study could be related to water movement patterns in the distribution network.

Key words---outbreak, Escherichia coli 0157:H7, distribution system model, public supply, untreated groundwater

INTRODUCTION
Cabool, Mo. (population 2090) is located in the Ozark hills, near the border with Arkansas. The area is in a limestone formation and sink holes are part of the topography. Dairy agriculture forms the economic base for this farm community. Before the outbreak the public water supply for Cabool was obtained from deep wells and then transmitted untreated to storage reservoirs in the distribution system. During the period 15 December 1989-20 January 1990, residents and visitors to the community of Cabool, Mo., experienced 243 cases of diarrhea (85 bloody) and four deaths (Swerdlow et al., 1992). The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) conducted a household survey from which they concluded that persons living inside the city (on the municipal water) were 18.2 times more likely to develop bloody diarrhea than for persons living outside the city using private well water. After a boil water order was issued (5 January 1990) in the city of Cabool, the number of new cases rapidly declined. The city authorities implemented a chlorination program for the community water supply on 12 January. The majority of the cases occurred during a period of exceptionally cold weather during which there were numerous water meter replacements (14-22 Dec. 1989) on service lines and two breaks in the water distribution lines (22-23 Dec. and 25-26 Dec. 1989).

Escherichia coil serotype 0157:H7 was found in the feces of some infected individuals. This organism has been detected in most areas of the U.S.A. (Ostroff et al., 1991) and is reported to be a common cause of bacterial diarrhea in Canada and Great Britain (Griffin et al., 1988; Laboratory Center for Disease Control, 1987; Public Health Laboratory Service, 1987). Two recent studies from the U.S.A. have reported that this organism is a more common cause of diarrhea than Shigeila (MacDonald et al., 1988; Marshall et al., 1990). Very young and very old persons are most likely to become ill and most likely to develop complications (Stewart et al., 1983; Ryan et al., 1983; Pudden et al., 1985; Krishnan et al., 1987). One serious complication of E. coli 0157:H7 infection is the hemolytic uremic syndrome. The infective dose for this pathogenic E. coli is estimated to range from 10 to 100 organisms with infectivity being most severe among infants, senior citizens and patients in nursing homes (Stewart et aL, 1983; Ryan et al., 1983; Pudden et al., 1985; Krishnan et ai., 1987). In the Cabool outbreak, elderly persons were more likely to become ill and the four deaths were among elderly citizens. Previous outbreaks of E. coli 0157 have been caused by contaminated hamburgers (Griffin et ai., 1988). To our knowledge this is the first outbreak associated with waterborne transmission. Another outbreak associated with waterborne transmission of this pathogen occurred in Scotia,! duriitg the Summer of 1990 and has been reported (Dee et al., 1991).

This E. coli serotype has been isolated from the feces of healthy dairy cattle, suggesting that cattle are an important reservoir for this pathogenic agent (Martin et al., 1986; Borczyk et al., 1987; Orskov et al., 1987; Wells et al., 1992). Cattle raising is a major agricultural activity on the Cabool watershed. In general, the prevalence of various E. coil serotypes pathogenic to man in farm animals has been reported to be less than 9% (Oeldreich, 1972).

Investigative approach
At the invitation of the CDC (U.S. Public Health Service), the Missouri State Health Department and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, staff members of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Drinking Water Research Division (Cincinnati, Ohio) went to Cabool to review data, conduct a sanitary survey and collect additional water samples to bc sent to the EPA Research Center in Cincinnati for further study. Since this investigation of the water system was conducted 4 weeks after the main impact of the outbreak had subsided, the strategy for investigating the possible involvement of water supply focused on the study of long term monitoring data from the groundwater supply (aquifer and distribution quality). In addition, attempts were made to model the distribution system for movement of water through the system. A general inspection of the drinking water supply system and operating practice was also conducted. Capturing a segment of the water representing water quality remaining in the distribution system at the start of this investigation but from the period of the outbreak did not appear probable because of time elapsed (6 weeks). However, there was a remote chance that some water from the outbreak period might still be found at the extremities of the distribution system where water usage was low.

METHODS
Specialwater samples of 200 ml volumewere collected on 14 and 15 February 1990 from the distribution network in addition to sample collections at the two operating wells (wellNos 5 and 6) for analysesat the EPA Research Center, Cincinnati. All of the special sampling sites were selected from the extremities of the distribution system where water flow might be static and perhaps representative of water from 4 to 6 weeks prior.

These water samples were analyzed for total coliform bacteria by the membrane filter method using m-Endo LES agar and m-T7agar. Sampleswerealso analyzed by multiple tube procedure using lauryl tryptose broth with confirmation in brilliant green bilebroth and by the Colilert system (EnvironetiesInc., Branford, Conn.). Total coliform isolates were identified to species using the API 20E multiple test system (Analytab Products, Plainview, N.Y.). Heterotrophic plate count analyses were conducted by the pour plate procedure using plate count agar and by the spread plate procedure using R2A agar. All microbiologicalanalyses were conducted according to standard procedures (APHA, 1989).

Survival experiments were conducted using filter-sterilized (0.22#m porosity Duropore® filters, Millipore Corp., Bedford, Mass.) water. An 18-h culture of E. coil 0157:H7 grown at 37°C was washed twice by centrifugation using Standard Method~ phosphate buffer and used as the inoculum. The samples were held in the dark at 5°C and assayed L~eriodically by the spread plate procedure using sorbitol MacConkey agar.

Chlorine determinations
Chlorine levels were measured in the field using the N,N-diethyl-p-phenylenecfiatrdne (DPD) colorimetric method (APHA, 1989).

Samples
Samples were collected in sterile containers to which sodium thiosulfate was added to neutralize up to 5 mg/l of any disinfectant residual (APHA, 1989). Samples were shipped on ice by overnight carrier and analyzed within 24 h of collection.

Source water quality
The drinking water system in Cabool, Mo. is supplied by four municipal wells. Figure 1 shows the distribution network, the two major wells serving the system and the water supply storage tanks. Prior to the outbreak, no disinfectant was added to the municipal water supply. A local dairy industry uses water from both the municipal system and from its own private wells (D in Fig. 1).

Although there are four wells within the public water supply system, only well Nos 5 and 6 were operating during the time in question. Two other wells (Nos 3 and 4) are used only during the summer months when the demand for water is high. During the winter months, well Nos 3 and 4 are valved off from the system and electrical power to the pumps is disconnected.

Well No. 6 (which supplies approx. 55% of the water supply) is located near the southwest perimeter of the distribution system. This well generally operates continuously. The well depth is approx. 305 m (1000 it) and is cased to a depth of 135 m (450 it) where a submersible pump 7.21/s (115 gpm capacity) is located. Well No. 5 is located along the North perimeter and operates intermittently as demand requires. Typically, during winter, well No. 5 operates for approx. 8 h/day though this use period varies considerably With demand. It is a drilled well approx. 396 m (1300 ft) deep and cased to a depth of 134.4 m (441 it). The submersible pump in well No. 5 is set 134m (440 it) below ground and has a capacity of 17.3 l/s (275 gpm).

Both well heads are housed in small buildings constructed atop poured concrete slabs. Neither well head appeared to be susceptible to surface run-off from agricultural fields on the watershed. The well head structures housed the sanitary seal around the wells, totalizer flow meters and fluoride injection systems to maintain desired fluoride levels in the distribution water.

Drilling logs were not available for well No. 6 but the logs for well Nos 3, 4 and 5 indicated that the underlying geological formations were very similar to each other, possibly being in the same aquifer. Overlying geologic formations included red clay and gravel near the surface (to a depth of approx. 150 it) followed by limestone, sandstone and flint formations. The wells were cased continuously from the surface to a depth of at least 122m (400 ft) and passed through various limestone formations described as very hard, medium hard and hard in the drilling log. The drill logs indicated that the aquitard layers were fairly impervious to surface water infiltration.

Monitoring data supplied by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources for the period 9 November 1981-1 l January 1990 for city well Nos 5 and 6 revealed that no coliform bacteria were ever detected using the membrane filter test on 100 ml sample portions. As a further check on water quality in the aquifer, permission was given by the Mid American Dairy Company (D in Fig. l), to examine their records on the three private wells (located on plant property) they used in milk processing. These wells were drilled to the same depth as the city wells (approx. 305 m) and therefore assumed to be in the same aquifer. Once each month one of the three wells is examined by the certified milk laboratory for coliform bacteria, using the same membrane filter technique employed by the certified State Health Department Laboratory. Inspection of laboratory reports for the years 1987-1990 reveal no coliforms present in 100 ml test portions analyzed for any of the three private well water supplies. These findings suggest that the aquifer was protected from surface water contamination.

Water supply storage
Water storage was provided by two storage tanks: a 1900m 3 (500,000 gal.) tank (T500 in Fig. 1) and a 230m 3 (60,000 gal.) elevated tank (T60 in Fig. 1). A third elevated water storage tank, 380 m3(100,000 gal.), designated as YT in Fig. I, was not being utilized. Based on discussions with local personnel there is little draw-down (less than 0.6 m/ day) in the water storage tanks. This observation was later verified by hydraulic analysis. Water storage tank T500 is located approx. 180 m (600 r) east of well No. 5 in the northwest part of the distribution system. This storage tank is fed primarily by well No. 5. According to utility personnel the pump at well No. 5 is turned on when the water level in tank T500 drops to 441 m 0447 it) or below and continues pumping until the water level reaches approx. 441.6 m (1449 ft) above sea level. The upper water level is about 2.4 m (8 ft) below the overflow level.

The elevated storage tank (T60) is centrally located in the distribution system and the overflow elevation for this storage tank is approx. 444.1 m (1457 it) above sea level. Water from both wells feeds this storage tank at different times during normal operation.

The yellow storage tank (YT) is an elevated tank and is located less than 1.6 km (1 mile) west of well No. 6 and is at the southwest end of the distribution system. A faulty pressure valve has prevented this storage tank from operating properly. The ground elevation of 396 m (1300 ft) is such that the water level will only reach the base of the elevated storage compartment when the overflow elevations of the other two storage tanks are reached. Thus, this storage tank provided storage only in the column rising up to the compartment (bulb) and could be a substantial deadend. All of the storage tanks in the system use a single riser tube for both filling and drawing. Therefore, when the tanks were being used, the last water placed in the tanks was the first to be used. Thus, the water in storage could be stratified and provide an excellent location for bacterial activity.

Distribution system integrity
On-site investigation of the distribution system reveals the pipe network consists of a mixture of cast iron, galvanized iron and plastic pipe with sizes of 5.08, 10.16, 15.24, 20.32 and 50.8cm (2, 4, 6, 8 and 10in.) diameter intermixed. Meter records also indicated a 35% level of unaccounted for water. This could have occurred through leaking mains, inaccurate meters or non-metered use. The dairy has a backflow prevention device that isolates the private well supplies from the Cabool distribution system. There are no records on water pressure in the system but a pressure gage on the water supply side of an alarm valve to the fire control system at Mid Am Dairy reveals pressure on 14 February 1990 was fluctuating around 7.75 kg/cm2 (110 psi) (Fig. 1). The water pressure on 22-23 December 1989, during a major loss of water over several hours from a main break, could not be determined beyond a note of reported "low water pressure" in the neighborhood. A second line break occurred on 26 December resulting in similar duration and water loss. Figure 1 shows the location of both line breaks in the central part of the system and the meter replacements.

Discussion with the Cabool water plant superintendent indicated there is a general practice to flush all line repairs by turning on the valve at the lower elevation of the break area and flushing the line out a fire hydrant at the higher elevation for 15min. Line disinfection is not practiced and there has never been an annual scheduled flushing of the entire water distribution system since water quality was considered good and there were no complaints of taste and odors.

Based on customer recollections, the two major line breaks on the system did not reduce water pressure systemwide although localized low water pressure created opportunities for back siphonage near the break and a pathway for sewage infiltration. Line flushing around the breaks was a 15-minwater release at nearest fire plug below the repair and was not preceded by pipe disinfection. No follow-up bacteriological sampling was conducted, and the routine monitoring schedule did not allow for sampling during this time frame.

Surface water run-offfrom the watershed did infiltrate the separate sewage system in addition to drainage through an open culvert system along the city streets. As a consequence, sewage and stormwater run-off may be found near water pipes, meter boxes and service lines, particularly after a major storm event. Sincethe weather prior to and during the outbreak was severely cold, stormwater run-off was probably not a factor except where surface water collected in servicemeter boxes. Sewage, however, being at and above freezing temperature would continue to saturate adjacent soil as it flowed through the deteriorated pipe collection system towards the overloaded wastewater lagoon in the southeastern part of town. Overflow from the lagoon runs over low-lying land that also contains distribution pipes before reaching the river nearby.

The sewage collection system in Cabool is located (for the most part) away from the drinking water distribution lines, but does cross or approach the water lines in several locations. Even though there had been no rain for several days during the site visit in February, severalmanhole covers showed indications of overflow problems. Various sewage paper products littered the areas around a few manhole covers, and several other entry structures showed small erosion gullies around their periphery. The final manhole or collection box before entering the wastewater treatment lagoons showed evidence of routine overflow. In fact, there were periodic overflows during the time it took to walk around the lagoons. This overflow ran over land to the Big Piney River. A water main ran directly underneath this overload waste flow.

RESULTS
State agency monitoring data on the distribution system for the period of 5 December 1989-12 January 1990 revealed seven coliform positive samples among 65 distribution samples collected. None of these official routine or special samples were collected between 19 December and 2 January. However, a dairy inspector, who lives across the street from the first main break collected a water sample in his home on 8 January (flaming the faucet and using a sterile sample bottle) and transported it to the certified dairy laboratory in St Louis for analysis on the same day. The laboratory reported 22 coliforms per 100 ml in the water sample. Two follow-up samples taken 11 January 1990 at the home of the dairy inspector before chlorination of the water system was instituted, were negative for coliforms.

Results of the bacteriological analyses (Table 1) reveal no coliforms were detected from well No. 5, well No. 6 and the two distribution sites (Grandview Terrace and Rt 60 at M Highway). However, 55-95 coliforms were detected in three distribution sites from the southwestern part of the pipe network and in water adjacent (100 m distant) to the yellow storage tower, indicating that there had been a contaminating event before the February sampling period.

On l0 July 1990 the Cabool distribution system was again sampled at the yellow water tower and two areas of potential slow flow (Kalco Manufacturing near the yellow tower and Cedar Bluff sites at the extreme southeastern portion of the system). While there were less than 1.1 coliforms per 100 ml detected at the latter two sites, the yellow water tower sample did yield a slow fermenting coliform (l.l organisms/ 100 ml) identified as Klebsiella oxytoca by the API- 20E species differentiation system. The heterotrophic plate count at this site was 1,000,000 organisms per ml, suggesting a static water situation. Since the water supply is now disinfected with chlorine, residual surviving coliforms in the slow moving water around the yellow tower area may have still persisted but in a stressed state. On 12 January 1990, the city began chlorinating the well water by discontinuing fluoridation, and adding a liquid commercial bleach to the water supply using the fluoride pumps. Free available chlorine was monitored at a sampling port located 30 ft from the injection point at well No. 5 and another one located 150 ft from the well No. 6 injection point. The measured free chlorine concentration at the two sampling ports for the first 31 days after chlorination began is shown in Fig. 2. The chlorine dose applied at well No. 6 was less variable than well No. 5 due to the fact that well No. 5 is only operated as needed and well No. 6 is pumping constantly• There still was a highly variable measured amount at both locations.

Coliform colonies detected from the three positive samples were submitted to purification on plate count agar and then identified to species using a commercial multi-test system (API-20E). These results are shown in Table 2.

While the profile of coliform species may have been biased since only 15 or 16 colonies from each sample were examined, all three coliform positive samples contained Escherichia hermanii, a possible fecal organism (Brenner et al., 1982). Although E. hermanii is not known to cause gastroenteritis, its presence is significant because this organism closely resembles E. coli 0157:H7 in its biochemical profile and has been found in raw milk, ground beef and feces (Lior and Borczyk, 1987)• Further study using an enrichment process revealed that some of these coliform isolates were tetracycline resistant, a characteristic shared with the outbreak strain of E. coil 0157:H7. An additional coliform (Klebsiella pneumoniae) was isolated in a secondary study of these samples and grew at 44.5°C, fitting the definition of a fecal coliform.

All Enterobacter sp. isolates were found to be resistant to cephalothin, tetracycline and ampicillin. The E. hermanii isolates were resistant to carbenicillin and showed intermediate resistance to ampicillin. The identical antibiotic resistance patterns seen for the same species of coliform bacteria isolated from the three different locations in the distribution system suggests that the organisms originated from a common source of contamination.

Since infections with E. coil 0157:H7 occurred over a 2-3 week period, persistence of E. coli serotype 0157:H7 was an important aspect of this investigation. To study this aspect, water from well Nos 5 and 6 and two distribution sites of slow flow were filter sterilized and inoculated with a strain of E. coli 0157:H7 (strain A) obtained from the University of Wisconsin, Food Microbiology Department. Later when the specific pathogenic strain isolated from patient feces became available, a new sample from well No. 5 was again filter sterilized and inoculated with the specific pathogen strain (strain B).

A high density inoculation ranging from 540,000 to 1,800,000 cells per ml was used in anticipation of a fast decline in E. coli density. An incubation temperature of 5°C was selected to simulate what may have been the water temperature in the distribution system at the time in question. Results of these survival experiments are given in Table 3. This information indicates that both strains of the E. coli serotype had a relatively slow rate of die-off so that after a week or more, relatively high concentrations could have remained. In fact, there was only a 2 log decline in the pathogenic strain in 5°C well water after 35 days. By contrast, parallel cultures of either strain of this pathogen held in Cabool water at 20°C revealed a 5 log decline after 35 days of storage.

SYSTEMS M O D E L I N G
In an attempt to gain insight on how system failure and/or contaminant propagation can influence water quality, a model developed by EPA's Drinking Water Research Division was applied to the Cabool, Mo. water supply system. The model and the approach utilized in this study had been tested and validated extensively but never before applied in a waterborne disease investigation (Clark et al., 1988; Males et al., 1988; Grayman et al., 1988, Clark and Coyle, 1990).

Both steady-state and dynamic modeling approaches were attempted in this investigation. The steady-state modeling (assuming uniform demand and supply throughout the system) was used to determine where the water from well Nos 5 and 6 would be expected to be found under "normal" or average cold weather demand conditions. Dynamic modeling (variations in system conditions over a given period) was used to track contaminant propagation in the system. These conditions are described later.

In this case study, the distribution system was represented by a link-node network. A node is created along a pipe when there is a major change in pipe direction, an intersection or tee, or a change in pipe diameter. Wells, tanks and major water users are also considered nodes. The run ofpipe between two nodes is then considered a link. A hydraulic model was then used to determine flow directions and velocitiesin links.

Figure 3 shows the information contained in all the previous figures with additional data on households where cases occurred. Based on the previous analysis it seems unlikely that the public water sources (well Nos 5 or 6) or a possible dairy interconnection caused the outbreak. It seems more likely that the outbreak resulted from disturbances in the system that are in close proximity to most of the outbreak cases. The hypothesis that some disturbance in the system allowed contaminants to enter and be propagated throughout the distribution system was therefore pursued.

Meter replacement scenario
Movement of water and contaminants resulting from hypothetical contamination at sites where water meters were replaced in December 1989 was studied. Hydraulic patterns associated with the normal conditions and break conditions were used in the analysis. For each situation, the water at each node in the vicinity of the meter replacements was contaminated by assuming an initial arbitrary concentration of l0s organisms per ml at the site with no die-off. No further additional contamination was added. The movement of the contaminated water was then traced and nodes that would receive the contaminated water (at various dilution levels) were identified and plotted. The contaminant propagation varied widely. Figure 3 shows that in some meter replacements the spread of the contaminant covered a large section of the distribution system, but in other cases it remained localized. Since only three homes that had meters replaced had illnesses, it was concluded that meter replacement was not the major cause of the outbreak but could have accounted for the early cases prior to the line breaks.

Main break and repair scenario
A dynamic analysis of the movement of water under normal and break conditions was simulated. EPA's Dynamic Water Quality Model (DWQM) was applied to examine the movement of flow in the system under the normal operating conditions prior to the break being repaired and hydraulic situations simulating recovery following repair. A conservative contamination level of 105 organisms per ml in a 0.6 l/s (10 gpm) flow for a period of 4 h of continuous flow to match the normal hydraulic demand in the area was assumed at each of the breaks. No die-off of organisms was assumed. Movement of water and contaminants resulting at each of the two break sites (22-23 Dec. and 25-26 Dec.) was simulated using the hydraulic conditions immediately following the repair of the breaks (Figs 4 and 5).

Figures 4 and 5 show the extent of the flow of contaminated water resulting from the two breaks. Note, flow of contaminated water overlays most of the outbreak cases with at least 10-100 organisms (4 log reduction) still present. Combining both break patterns provided an overlay of 85% of all household case locations.

Because several hours had elapsed before the breaks were repaired, the tanks had been drawn down quite extensively. Thus, it required nearly 36 h of continuous operation of both wells for the tanks to recover. This scenario resulted in well No. 5 operating to fill the large 1900 m3 (500,000 gal.) tank while well No. 6 served the daily demand and reaching portions of the system not normally receiving well No. 6 water. This would enable contaminated water from both break areas to cover an extensive area, exposing nearly the entire service area to contaminated drinking water.

DISCUSSION
The field investigation revealed the need for several changes in operational maintenance of the distribution system, monitoring site selection on the pipe network and infrastructure improvements in sewage collection and its treatment. The concern was that any disturbances in the distribution network may provide a contamination pathway from stormwater run-off or sewage infiltration.

The distribution system must protect the quality of water transmitted throughout the system. In the case of the Cabool, Mo. water system, water supplied to consumers was not disinfected prior to the outbreak, so residual disinfection was not available to provide a measure of protection from contaminants that might enter through line breaks, back siphonage or crossconnections. Flushing the entire distribution system in a systematic manner to get more movement of the chlorine residual into all parts of the pipe network, was needed to remove static water from slow flow sections, deadends and stratified water in storage tanks on a periodic basis.

Another area of concern was the water service meter repair practices that do not include disinfection application. A rigorous protective protocol must be followed during the repair or replacement of existing mains and service meters in order to avoid bacteriological contamination of the distribution network (Buelow et al., 1976). No disinfectant can possibly be effective when lines contain sediments that provide a protective habitat for bacterial growth. Pipe interiors, meter fittings and valves must be protected against contamination. Meter boxes should be drained of surface water seepage prior to meter replacement and new meters carefully inserted free of soil particles. After completion, lines should be flushed at a minimum velocity of 76.2 cm/s (2.5 ft/s).

In the real world of a mixed population of organisms, antagonistic competition would have depressed the persistence rate of E. coil serotype somewhat but the laboratory experiments with Cabool groundwater still suggest that £. coil serotype 0157:H7 was capable of persisting long enough to reach a significant portion of the distribution system. While the pathogenic agent was never detected in the groundwater, there is reason to believe the coliform isolates from special sampling and the causative agent were at one time closely associated, being indicative of contamination from the sewage system or storm drains.

Regardless, circumstantial evidence strongly suggests that a break in the public health barrier concept did occur between sewage, stormwater and water supply. For example, six cases of bloody diarrhea were identified as having occurred prior to the first water main break but after 43 meter replacements on the system. Seven other cases were reported between the two water main breaks that were 3 clays apart, with the remaining 72 cases identified within a week of the second break. This situation points to the possibility that E. coli 0157:H7 was prevalent for several weeks in the community.

These observations suggest that the existing sanitary sewer system was prone to infiltration from stormwater run-off and underdesigned for the capacity transmitted. Inspections were not made as to possible sewer line collapses or other blockages that would amplify the collection and treatment problems. What was considered as a consequence was the fact that sewage overflows transgress surface areas over drinking water distribution lines and in a few locations run across sites where water meter boxes are located.

There are some unique characteristics for this pathogen that should be recognized by state public health and water supply authorities monitoring municipal water supplies. The organism lacks the enzyme /~-giucuroniclase, will not grow at 44.5°C and may give variable gas fermentation results with lactose at 35°C (Doyle and Schoeni, 1984; Kirshnan et al., 1987; Hartman, 1988). As a consequence, the organism will not produce a fluorescence in the 4- methylumbelliferyl-/J-D-glucuronidase (MUG) assay (Chang et al., 1989) and will not grow in any fecal coliform test using elevated temperature incubation. The epidemic strain was routinely MUG negative using lauryl tryptose broth and EC broth containing MUG and also in the Colilert and Coliquik commercial media. The organism does differentiate as sheen colonies on a conventional total coliform membrane filter M-Endo type medium but will not produce a positive result in the multiple tube or P-A fermentation tests for coliforms. Thus, the occurrence of E. coil 0157:H7 may be somewhat difficult to identify in routine monitoring for E. coil as fecal coliforms.

If sewage or surface water drainage was the origin for this pathogenic E. coil, then the question arises as to why this organism and other coliforms were not detected in the contaminated water supply. It is most important to note that no official monitoring of the public water supply was done during the outbreak period. One special sample was collected at a home across the street from the first line break on 8 January 1990. The certified laboratory reported the sample contained 22 coliforms per 100 ml but no analysis was done on the sample for fecal coliform or £. coll. The next sampling at this same site was done on 11 January 1990 and tested negative for coliform bacteria. By the time the contamination had passed through the system disinfection of the water supply had begun.

The other weakness in the monitoring program was to focus site selections to a few locations near the center of town. Perhaps if the sampling locations had included areas near deadends, some indication of the contaminating event would have been detected during the month. Distribution sample site selection should not focus only on locations in the center of town. More effort should be made to vary locations over the year so that water samples are frequently collected from the periphery of the pipe network. At these areas of slow flow there are more opportunities to capture water quality changes that could alert the water operator to the need for line flushing so that a chlorine residual could be restored or bacterial growth in sediments suppressed.

The proper and continual addition of a disinfectant needs to be practiced at all well heads. The data collected by the system operators have shown that a consistent chlorine residual is not maintained at the first sampling tap after chlorine addition. To help regulate the chlorine dose applied to the water system, the system operator should install effective chlorination equipment. This would mean installing either a liquid or a gaseous chlorine feed system. Liquid sodium hypochlorite (12-15% available chlorine; NOT HOUSEHOLD BLEACH) can be metered into the pipe systems at the well heads and with proper injectors/diffusers, no additional mixing would be required. Chlorine could also be injected at the well heads using a gaseous chlorine injection system. Once the proper equipment is installed, the system should be monitored to assure that a constant dose of chlorine is added to the water system. All deadends should be flushed until a chlorine residual is obtained in the flush water. Routine monitoring for chlorine residual near the first customer locations for each well, various sites within the distribution system and at taps at the extremities of the distribution system need to be done in order to assure that a proper chlorine residual is available throughout the distribution system. The maintenance of a chlorine residual in the distribution system would help to insure the integrity of the water supply in case of future contamination within the system.

Infiltration of stormwater run-off into the sewage collection system caused frequent overflows of wastewater from manhole covers over junction boxes. The pipe network needs infrastructure revitalization to stop surface surges of raw sewage. The wastewater lagoon system overflows periodically as a result of stormwater infiltration spilling over the banks in the vicinity of a section of the distribution line, before reaching a small stream. One of the retention lagoon cells was reported to be off-line which may reduce retention time and treatment process effectiveness, indicating operational practices need revision.

CONCLUSIONS
Those professionals familiar with the investigation of disease outbreaks know that establishing cause and effect is a difficult task. The principal value in reporting this type of research investigation lies in the following points:

(1) An outbreak of gastrointestinal illness attributed to E. coli 0157:H7 occurred in a groundwater supply that had been historically characterized as being of excellent quality and not in need of disinfection.

(2) This was the second reported waterborne occurrence of E. coil 0157:H7. This time in a community with an outbreak of 243 cases of bloody diarrhea and 4 deaths.

(3) Laboratory characteristics of the organisms are not typical of the classical E. coll. The organism is not detectable at 44.5°C in either the multiple tube or membrane filter fecal coliform tests, nor will it produce fluorescence in various MUG based media at 35°C.

(4) Illness cases were restricted to people using public water supply. Intensive search by CDC into other likely sources of contamination (meat, milk and sewage aerosols) proved negative for this pathogenic agent.

(5) This investigation provided the first opportunity to use a distribution system model to study the pattern of illness occurrences in relation to normal water movement patterns in the distribution system, develop descriptions in water flow caused by line breaks and map the diffusion of a pathogenic agent through either line breaks or meter replacements.