In May 2007, Escherichia coli was detected in tap water supplied by a company in North Holland. The company issued advice through mass media to boil tap water before consumption; this advice was lifted six  days  later. A cross-sectional study was  implemented  to investigate compliance  among  residents  in  this area.  Based  on postcode, a  total  of  300  households, chosen  randomly  from  a database of a private company performing internet-based surveys for different  marketing  purposes,  were  sent a  self-administered questionnaire for this study. The questionnaire contained questions on demographic information,  source of  information regarding the advice, response  to  it  and  personal opinions  on  the  company’s reaction  and  the  advice.  Ninety-nine  (66%)  households  of  the affected area and 90 (60%) households  from non-affected  areas served by the same company replied to the survey. All respondents knew about the advice. 81.8% of the respondents in the affected area and 5.6% of the non-affected areas reported complying with the advisory. Most respondents from the affected area still used unboiled water to brush teeth, wash salads and fruits. There was no difference in compliance between men and women. Using the mass media was  proved  to be efficient  to  inform the public and  could be used in the future in similar settings. However, more detailed wording of boiling advices should be considered in the future.

Introduction
Consumption of drinking water  may cause waterborne  disease which can be prevented by protection of the source water, efcient treatment  processes  and  reliable  distribution  systems.  The European Union Drinking Water Directive [1] demands monitoring of tap water for different parameters, such as Escherichia coli, to indicate possible faecal contamination from humans and animals.

System failure  or  human  error  may cause  an  increase  in  the level of pathogens in the water posing a risk of waterborne disease. For example, in 2001, a large outbreak of gastroenteritis occurred due to  accidental  introduction  of  partially treated  water  to  the drinking water supply system in the Netherlands, resulting in 921 households being exposed to contaminated water [2].

In the event that faecal contamination is detected the drinking water company may issue an advice to boil tap water before using it for domestic purposes. On 15 May 2007, E. coli was detected in samples collected the day before of the nished tap water delivered by a company in the province Noord-Holland (North-Holland) in the Netherlands. For preventive reasons, on the same day the company issued an advice for consumers to boil tap water for two minutes before consumption  but  that  this  was  not necessary for taking a shower or  washing.  This  information  was broadcasted  through mass-media including the national and regional television channel, radio and  newspapers. In addition,  a public website  used during emergency situations  (www.crisis.nl) and  a  toll-free  telephone number were made available for the public to provide information to households in the affected area.

The boil water advice had an impact on approximately 180,000 households in  the  affected  area  comprising 13  municipalities. The advice  was  lifted a week later, on  22  May  2007, as risk for public health was no longer present. In September 2007, the water company published a press release informing that the cause of the water contamination was due to run-off of rainwater contaminated with faeces of breeding gulls on the roof that had seeped into one of the six storage rooms [3].

Elevated  levels  of  microorganisms  in  drinking water  may represent a  public  health  risk.  For this  reason,  we  investigated compliance with  boil  water  advice  issued by  the  private  water company following the 2007 incident.

Methods
A cross-sectional study was implemented to investigate factors that may have affected water consumption habits of the residents in the  area supplied by the  water company. For this  purpose, on the company’s behalf, a self-administered questionnaire was sent to 300 households in June 2007. Households were selected on the basis of their residence postcodes; half in the area where the advice was valid and half in areas served by the same company but where the advice did not  apply. These participants  were derived from  a database of  a  private  company  that conducts  online  consumer surveys for marketing purposes.

The  questionnaire  contained  questions  on  demographic information, level of urbanisation, source and time of receiving the information regarding the advice, initial and secondary response to the advice and personal opinions on the company’s response and the advice itself. The data were sent back to  the  drinking  water company  and  the  National  Institute  for  Public  Health  and  the Environment, where  they  were  analysed.  The statistical  analysis was done with STATA v10.

Results

Ninety-nine households (66%) from the area affected by water contamination  and  90  households  (60%)  from  control  areas supplied with  water  by  the  same company  replied  to  the  survey. Women more  often  than  men  responded  to  the  questionnaire in both  the  affected  and  the non-affected  areas  (57.7%  of  all responders). The respondents represented 189 households with a total population of 505 people, 176 (34.9%) of whom were below the age of 18 years. There was no statistically signicant difference in the number of children per household between the affected and the non-affected areas (p=0.112). Descriptive results for the two different areas are presented in Table 1.

All  189  respondents  (100%)  in  both  areas  answered  that they had  been  informed  about  the advice.  Ninety-ve  (50.3%) of them said they had first  heard about it through the  television. Other sources were radio (24.3%), friends, relatives or neighbours (22.8%), newspapers (19.6%) and the internet (7.4%).

Persons  living  in  the  affected  area  were  more frequently disappointed  (14.1%)  about  the  choice  of  the  company  to  use mass  media  for  the  advice  than  people  residing  in  the  non-affected area (2.2%). In  the  affected  area,  seven  (9.3%)  of  the respondents had rst reacted with fear  to the information on the possible contamination of water, 34 (45.3%) responded with self-control and 34 (45.3%) with the intention to take measures. The corresponding percentages for the non affected area were 15.7%, 72.9% and 11.4%. About half (48.5%) of the respondents from the affected area said they had looked for more information when they had heard about the advice, while the corresponding proportion of respondents from the non-affected area was only 8.9% (p<0.001). The most common source of active search for more information was the website of the water supply company.

Eighty-one (81.8%) of all respondents in the affected area said they had complied with the advice. This was done by buying bottled water (43.4% of all  respondents  in  affected  area)  or  boiling  tap water for two  minutes before consuming it (70.7%). None of the respondents in the area stopped consuming tap water completely. Five (5.6%)  of  the  respondents  in the  non-affected  area  were buying bottled water and  three  of  them  (3.3%)  were  boiling  tap water during the advice.  These numbers were considerably lower than the corresponding ones in the affected area, but showed that compliance exceeded beyond the affected area.

Even though it had not been advised to boil water for activities such as  washing and showering, 26  (26.3%) of the respondents in the affected area stated that they had not been aware of that.

Concerning  the  image  of  the  drinking  water  company, 177 respondents (93.7%)  thought  that  the  company had  done  well informing the consumers  about  the  water  contamination  and  its response to  it. This prevailing  opinion was not  different between respondents from the affected area and those from the non affected area.

The respondents’ compliance with the advice was independent of sex, age and the presence of children in the household. However, the respondents were 138.6 times more likely to follow the advice if  a  second  person  in  the  household  was  following  it  as  well (p<0.001).

Reasons for non-compliance with the advice are given in Table 2.Some of the respondents replied that they had been using boiled water for uses  other  than  drinking,  too.  These  results  are  shown in Table 3.The majority of the respondents stated that their image of the company had not changed after the incident and the six-day advice (78.8% in the affected area and 88.9% in the non-affected area).

Factors affecting compliance
The type  of  mass  media  from which  people  in  the  affected area found out about  the advice played no signicant  role in the subsequent compliance of the respondents. The highest compliance rates occurred among those in the affected area who heard about the  advice  from  the  internet  (90%)  or  from  friends  (89.5%). Respondents informed by more than one source were more likely to have  complied  with  the  advice (90.9%  against  79.2%)  but this  difference  was  not  statistically  signicant.  The  source  of information did  not depend on  the  age (p=0.6532). Compliance with the advice  did  not  differ  between  households  with  children and those without children (p=0.536).

Respondents who undertook active search for more information may have been more likely to follow the advice than those who did not proceed to further active search for more information (89.4% vs. 74.5%, p=0.058).Since all respondents knew about the advice, it was not possible to estimate unwitting compliance rates.

Conclusions
Since excess of standard levels of certain microorganisms such as E. coli indicate faecal contamination and the possible presence of pathogens in tap water, the time between  the water  sampling, water analysis  and  the boil water  notice  is  essential. During this period, consumers may be  exposed to tap  water of unacceptable quality. The choice of  mass media for broadcasting the advice is therefore believed to be an effective measure to prevent panic and to protect public health.

From this study, it can be concluded that participating consumers not only thought that they had been informed about the advice in a timely  manner, but  that also  the  response  of  the  company  to ensure the advice would reach the public had been satisfactory as well as the choice of communication channels. Thus, the incident did not lead to customers’ dissatisfaction or a degradation of the company’s image.

The sample  in  our  study  derived from  a  database  of  people who subscribed to be included in different research surveys. This could  raise  questions  regarding  the  representativeness  of  the study population. We agree that there is a need for similar studies with samples  deriving  randomly  from  the whole  population  and not from  potentially  biased data sources. For  example,  100% of the participants  stated  that  they  had  been informed  about  the boiling water advice; however, subscribers to online databases for marketing purposes may be more likely to regularly follow the news than the general population.

In the Netherlands,  boil water notices are not harmonised but are determined by the drinking water company itself. This results in different  advice  with  respect  to,  for  instance,  boiling  time. Internationally recognised  guidelines,  such  as  the World Health Organization (WHO)  Guidelines  for  Drinking  Water Quality [4], could be taken into consideration in case of similar “crises” in the future. According to data from the water company involved in our study, about thirty boil water advices are  issued per  year in their responsibility area (ca. 700,000 households); involving on average 100 households per time. So, the  chance to  receive a boil water advice is small but existing.

The inclusion of  recommendations  including  use  of  water  for brushing  teeth,  washing  fruits  and  vegetables  may  also  prove helpful in future advice, since it is not only consumption of water through drinking that may pose a  risk  to  the  consumer. Bathing and showering  may  also  need  to be  addressed  separately, as a possible link between this kind of exposure to contaminated water and itching has been described elsewhere [2]. Also, although this conclusion does  not  directly  follow  from our  results,  vulnerable groups should be targeted separately in the advice; elderly people and children may easily miss information disseminated through the means of mass media [5,6].

Few studies have been published on boil water notices and their results seldom reach the  public.  Further  research  would  also  be useful to  incorporate  ndings  from  compliance studies to model health effects of drinking contaminated water during similar events.